Disjoint Set Data Structures
Read
Discuss
Courses
Practice
A disjoint-set data structure is defined as one that keeps track of a set of elements partitioned into a number of disjoint (non-overlapping) subsets.
A union-find algorithm is an algorithm that performs two useful operations on such a data structure:
Find: Determine which subset a particular element is in. This can determine if two elements are in the same subset.
Union: Join two subsets into a single subset. Here first we have to check if the two subsets belong to the same set. If not, then we cannot perform union. 
Applications of Disjoint set Union: 
S. No.
Problem
Practice link
1
Kruskal’s Minimum Spanning Tree Algorithm.
solve
2
Job Sequencing Problem.
solve
3
Cycle Detection
solve
4
Number of pairs
solve
5
City With the Smallest Number of Neighbors at a Threshold Distance
solve
Practice problems for DSU:
Problem
Difficulty
Difference between Smallest and Largest Component of the graph after each Query
Easy
Equation satisfiability check
Easy
Evaluate the Fractions
Medium
Substring segment query & modification
Medium
Maximum number of soldier in a team
Medium
Minimum difference between components of the Graph after each query
Hard
Minimum cost to provide water
Hard
Minimum operations for adjacent E and E+1 pairing
Hard
Feeling lost in the world of random DSA topics, wasting time without progress? It's time for a change! Join our DSA course, where we'll guide you on an exciting journey to master DSA efficiently and on schedule.
You'll access excellent video content by our CEO, Sandeep Jain, tackle common interview questions, and engage in real-time coding contests covering various DSA topics. We're here to prepare you thoroughly for online assessments and interviews.
Ready to dive in? Explore our free demo content and join our DSA course, trusted by over 100,000 geeks! Whether it's DSA in C++, Java, Python, or JavaScript we've got you covered. Let's embark on this exciting journey together!

Last Updated : 22 Sep, 2023
102